Institute of Physics 2026 Talk


Mankind loves music,

CLICK




The flute predates the wheel by some 39 thousand years.
So it's clear that expressing ourselves is more necessary than getting about.

CLICK

Music was more important than movement.

Some people say that the wheel is the most important invention of all time, but if that was the case, why did it take another 39 thousand more years?

CLICK

Clearly people were happy with their flutes.

CLICK


In 2026 we have more than flutes to choose from.... we have synthesizers!

CLICK

and you know what they say,

CLICK

Give a man a record and they dance for the day,
But give that man a synthesizer and they can dance for a lifetime.

CLICK

Of course, the ability to create infinite sounds brings with it a requirement for infinite controls!

CLICK

So today there are thousands of amazing musical instruments, but most of them are very difficult to use, confusing to play, and make lots of assumptions about the people playing them.

Rather than making things easier, 
in many ways, technology has made them more challenging.

So how did we get here?

CLICK

Before music could be recorded, to hear music, you would have to play it yourself or find somebody to play it for you. 

You could sing or play an instrument. 

The best music was made together by groups - collectives of individuals performing together. 

Choirs and orchestras sounded bigger and more powerful than individuals alone.

Played together, sounds complement each other. 

The quantity of musical instruments grew to cover all the different pitch and timbre combinations. 

Orchestras grew exponentially.

Soon, musical instruments became as expressive as singing.

And the complexity to play them grew to represent this broad musical range.

For as long as we have been making music with instruments, we have been trying to find ways to automate the process. 

There were church organs that used piano-rolls - punch cards with holes cut out in sequences to play the corresponding notes on the organ, or the church bell sequencer…

[CLICK] Bell Sequencer

That operated in the much same way as the music box, with a roller and pegs that twangs its musical sequence as it rotates. 

[CLICK] Music Box

Inventors rushed to create self playing musical instruments and automatons, including the inventor of the robot, Jacques de Vaucanson who made a humanoid flautist in 1737. 

[CLICK]

As time passed, more instruments were created that could replace members of these groups. 

A drum machine to replace the drummer,

[CLICK]
A keyboard to replace an organist 


[CLICK] RCA MK2

A synthesizer instead of a bassist,

It seemed the only thing that human ingenuity couldn’t replicate was the human voice itself.


Soon note automation, otherwise known as sequencing, became the heart of the music production studio.

[CLICK]  VC3

What started life as the metronome, soon evolved into the electronic heart beat known as the ‘click track’, a way of controlling other instruments so that they play in time with each other. 

Through automation came synchronisation - keeping all instruments perfectly in time.



As more parts of the music could be automated, fewer people were needed to make the music, so band sizes began to shrink, but more bands formed as a result, even solo artists were now a possibility!

[click] Mammoth Beat Organ


Bands went from large orchestras with dozens of different instruments or choirs with hundreds of members, to smaller collectives assisted with technology.



So, machines revolutionised the process of making music as they not only had a fidelity and timing that most humans could only dream of, but they were reliable and very rarely made mistakes.

With the advent of recorded music, which was a way to make music once, but be able to listen to it forever.


A single person, given time, could create music with many instruments by overlaying takes - superimposing layers of sounds over one another like a musical viennetta.

[click] Amiga 500

Finally.
Pop music could be made at home and it could be made cheap.

<<< >>>

The idea of offsetting a complicated and unforgiving process to a machine to handle on its own, is a liberating concept, and having a competent backing band at your command is certainly convenient. 


[click] Electronium

<<< >>>

For many decades, Popular music was defined by the sounds of the tool that made the music. To replicate the distinct sound of 1980s music, use 1980s technologies.

Everything would change forever however with the advent of digital signal processing, where every single nuance of a sound could be altered without a loss in quality. 

Audio could now be manipulated at the atomic level.

For example, automation could “correct” imperfections, such as altering a recording so that the singer was always in tune and in-time.

At first these systems were slow and large but today they work in real time and on devices that fit into your smallest pocket. 

The tools of today allow you to dynamically create or synthesize any sound or set of sounds without any musical background. 

Automation, or automatic orchestration, meant perfect replication. 

The click track automated tempo, digital interfaces like MIDI automated the melodies, then sampling came along and automated the timbres, the very sounds of the instruments themselves.

Reliable, always available and convenient, the machines didn’t require paying and in many ways formed the perfect band.

A human could program instruments to play by themselves and form a whole band without people.

Now, in 2026, instruments can program themselves. 
Artificial intelligence is commonplace.
And devices that can generate music are not unusual.

But like asking ChatGPT to write you a story, 

It removes the process entirely and reduces your connection with the creation. You remain a passive consumer rather than an active creator.

[click] “real destination”

And with music making, “The real destination is the journey”.

[click]

True joy comes from the act of creation, the personal expression, the feelings of ownership, and the ability to share that finished piece with your friends.


With music, the end result is your prize for participation, something that holds a deep personal connection. 

[click]

Music is kind of like an infinitely rewarding video game with unlimited levels, no high score and a satisfying prize for everybody at the end.

[CLICK]




Instruments are designed to play together so their sonic outputs need to harmonize and sound complementary to one another. 

The cello improves the sound of the violin, which expands on the sound of the viola for example. 

These instruments speak the same language.
In fact all instruments speak a similar language.

[click] AFX twin quote

Music is just patterns of air.

Whether ingrained or part of a learned musical lexicon- the rules for music are firmly established and can be quantified, defined and synthesised.

A happy song can be written with major chords which sound elevating and uplifting, whereas a sad song can be written using a minor scale that gives it an air of melancholy and malaise.

Choirs around the world harmonise together without worrying about tuning or scales.

Instruments were created to replicate these tones and thus a common musical language naturally emerged.

It appears that periodicity is a characteristic of all phenomena of nature.




Whether or not this language is entirely intrinsic is debated, but certainly elements are universal, such as the common sounds of mumese, the language we employ to speak to babies or cute animals.

We automatically raise our pitch and speak softly when communicating with babies and small animals. as we expect that is how they sound. 

In the same way that birds didn’t go to school to learn how to sing, mumese appears to be a birthright, an intrinsic universal communication system - all built in, ready to go. 

An instinct.


[click] Schopenhauer quote

<<>>

The Roland TB303 synthesizer contains an electronic filter that unintentionally mimics the distress cries of animals, where the instrument wails, shrieks and squeals - speaking to us on a primordial level, guided subconsciously by thousands of years of evolution in the wilderness, where we relied upon sound, which communicated with us before language.


This is the power of music - an innate language at the physiological level - you don’t just hear it, you feel it, you react to it. 


CLICK - Leibniz quote


Music affects us in profound ways.

<< >>

Before these modern times, it was not uncommon for a belief in the concept of the sound ether, one of the four stages in the creation of matter, where sound is crucial as the force that gives a substance its preliminary shape and form. 

Which sounds relatively similar to the Bose-Einstein condensate
I mean
They didn’t call it the big bang because they thought it was silent!

I mentioned this at the Royal Society during a talk I gave and a Quantum Physicist who was not impressed by my analogy, explained how without air, there could be no sound, completely disregarding the fact that there could be no ears to hear it either. If you are also unimpressed, please consider the Baryon Acoustic Oscillations, or consider visiting a big bang with an oxygenated helmet!


So, there is a hidden language that speaks directly to our brain, forged through millennia of evolution, directly influenced by our interactions with the world and the sounds that have guided us. 

This universal language can be used effectively to control moods and evoke emotions without any form of obvious communication.

Music is a powerful tool. 

So,
The goal for all musical instruments should be :

CLICK

To capture and authentically represent your expression.

But how are you supposed to express yourself authentically when there are so many keys and controls?

What we need is some kind of way to simplify the process, to leverage automation and exploit the predictability of music.

What if we could make an instrument that converts your natural physical expressions into auditory expressions, with sounds that accurately reflect your intention?

Turn movement into sounds that are shaped by your moods!
 
But how do you convert movements into music?

Most musical instruments do this already. 

Only they have rules and constraints that require you to play them a specific way before they reward you with music, rather than just sound, or worse, noise!

CLICK

Practise, Practise! 

Most musical instruments don’t come easily.

So rather than requiring someone to alter their physical expression to work with an instrument, how about we alter the instrument to work with that person’s expressions?


It becomes so much easier to learn a new skill when it doesn’t place any restraints on your physical movements, so that you can really express yourself in the way that you feel most comfortable.

Repetition encourages humans to learn patterns.

Repetition is reassuring.

CLICK

What would a musical instrument look like that uses your natural physical expressions as the basis for an auditory one?

Well, we should use automation to provide the foundational structure and Machine learning to interpolate our intentions, and reflect our expression by associating appropriate sounds. 

Sound directly inspired by you, where the music follows the dance.


As the smile is usually the last thing to go, especially with motor neuron disease,I’ve made one called the PhotoSYNTH that is smile powered, so without any musical skill you can make a full song using only your face. 
A four player collaborative musical instrument that uses machine learning to make music from your facial expression and mood.



CLICK

Rather than using machines and automation to replace the act of creation - the playing of the game - we can instead use it to replace the process.


CLICK

This is the dreamCapturer, a machine that converts your dreams into music, the soundtrack of your sleep, where your entire performance happens unconsciously, unaware, silent and still, yet the output is vivid, compelling and full of movement.

Sleep is an interesting part of the day as your vital statistics are being controlled by your central, autonomous nervous system, regulated by your unconscious dreaming brain. You don’t have to think to breathe or blink - this is the domain of the autonomous nervous system.

By converting biometrics and emotions into data, it is possible to analyse and extract the user's intention and mood. 

CLICK


Rather than compete with machines, collaborate with them.

Accept them for the robots that they are. 





---- 
Brief history of automation


Frank Rosenblatt's Perceptron in 1957 single layer nerual network


"Attention is all you need"
was the name of the paper that introduced us to the Transformer
(the T in ChatGPT)
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3295222.3295349


The problem with frontier technology is that it pushes into the unknown. 
Something seemingly simple though nobody knows when they are to be complete.

It is like choosing to dig a hole -- you can improve your hole forever as there is no way to know if the hole is complete. The more you dig, the harder it becomes to dig, until it becomes impossible to use the hole for what it was intended for in the first place. Then you keep digging, hoping to find a purpose for your hole.

All the data centers in the world are busy digging holes. They make so much rubble and waste but have little real purpose.

From nothing does something appear...


--- Automation & Helping Technology

For as long as there has been technological help, there have been people upset about it.

[CLICK - etching of Ned Ludd]

In the early 1800s, nearby to Manchester -- birthplace of the industrial revolution, a group of disenfranchised textile workers, led by Ned Ludd, systematically destroyed all the machinery that was brought in to increase productivity. The looms and mills were vandelised beyond the point of repair. This collective bargaining was powerful, but it was not the machines that the Luddites disagreed with, but how it was changing the labour practices and demanding more product whilst paying less. 

They were not anti-technology or anti-progress, they just required a gradual transition.


[CLICK - newspaper about calculators]

In the late 20th century, electronic calculators became affordable and portable, leading to children bringing them into schools to help them with their maths, polarising teachers and parents... Was this cheating? 

Anti-calculator protests kicked off and there was talk that 

The teachers were not anti-technology or anti-progress, they just worried that skills would be lost.


[CLICK - live bands at theatre]


Before recorded music, movie theatres would employ expensive live bands to play the soundtrack in real time. In retaliation to the introduction of recorded soundtracks, the American Federation of Musicians formed a new organisation called the Music Defense League

[CLICK - robot war]

Whose sole intention was to try to get the public to rally behind their idea that recorded music would destroy culture and livelihoods. They launched a public campaign using a robot to signify recorded music.

[CLICK - musical mincemeat]


They used wild hyperbolic headlines to sensationalise their concerns:

[CLICK] 
“The robot has no soul”,

[CLICK] 
“The robot, having no capacity for feeling, cannot produce music in a true sense.”

The campaign was unsuccessful, not because of the public outcry, but mainly because of economic factors such as the great depression that restricted theatre owners from hiring orchestras, leaving thousands of musicians out of work.

They were not anti-technology or anti-progress, they just didn't want artistry to be automated.

[CLICK A profit without honour]

Rather than using recorded music, many theatres hired the one-man-band machine called the American Fotoplayer which replaced the band with a mostly automated orchestra, controlled using piano rolls, but operated by a real human, neatly sidestepping any controversy.

[CLICK]



--- Agentic

Human agency has since become not only uneccessary but unfashionable too. Meanwhile, a huge proportion of world money is being actively spent to find a way to remove the human requirement entirely.

The so called agentic AI.

The tantalising concept of a robot slave, an unfallable, reliable, unrelenting, hard working machine doing all your chores for you is a lovely concept.

Suddenly all careers are considered chores.


Agentic 
The most popular open source project of all time.




With agentic AI, the AI can ask itself questions and prompt itself to complete tasks. 

Now, music doesn't even need to be prompted into existance by humans -- a machine can request it. 

This is not out of a desire for self-expression but instead guided by some requirement for data, an intention or desire provided by the audience.

This happened already with advertising, where two similar adverts are tested with the public and the most effective advert (the one that converts into more sales) usurps the weak one. 

Thanks to the internet, this can happen millions of times per second, with thousands of AB tests running in sequence, giving a realtime understanding of how an advert is performing.

Most digital campaigns have cameras that track user behaviours, how long people are staying to read it, their age, gender. It is not unreasonable to expect that an agentic created advert could deliver the perfect advert to a

AB testing.




They were not anti-technology or anti-progress, they just didn't want to lose their income.







--- How to regulate


There are some beautiful things that come with this technology.

A friend of mine who used to sit watching TV in silence with his kids, now make their own show set in space that features their own characters as well as friends and family. The kids work on the plot and draw designs for the characters and together they create something meaningful and memorable. 

I think that's a beautiful thing.

[CLICK CREATING > CONSUMING ]

When they started making the show they had their favourite famous characters intergrated in the show, Mickey Mouse and Bart Simpson were central characters...

However, Disney characters can no longer feature in these cartoons due to copyright claims!

Ultimately, this may reduce our desires for, and depencies on those famous characters, as their relevance fades away through self-imposed obscurity.

You cannot sample a single second of a song on Youtube without receiving a coyright claim, yet you can replicate entire discographies of artists with only subtle minor variations using machine learning and dodgy copyright entirely.

Things seem to getting a little out of hand.




A robot should admit when they do not know something. As most of these models are commercial, their success depends on the loyalty and trust of their users to spend their money and to attract more investment. If the model was honest and told you that it was not sure, or that it did not know, the user will likely try another model, and may in fact prefer this less honest model, not for the quality of the answer, but for its confident reassurance. 

This does not apply for open source models as they do not benefit from dishonesty.



We have already shown that music can have a profound impact on human phsyiology, mood and outlook, and we know that machines can synthesize any sound, will this 



Trojans
Open source
Inside this Trojan horse are killer drones.




What if I told you that the flat earth movement, the ridiculous belief that the world is plate shaped, was not in fact a grassroots phenomenon but a highly sophisticated trial of pshychometric control by leading data scientists who needed a convincing experiment to prove to their shareholders that people can be convinced to believe anything.



[CLICK]

people say AI is not creative but we have all experienced the hallucinationed answers that sound so plausable, but in reality are nonsensensical. 

nOBODY CAN DENY THEIR IMAGINATIONS.

Perhaps asking unanswerable questions is the true key to robot creativity?

Divide by zero?




[CLICK] The Isaac Asimov rules for robots 

One of the shortcomings of Isaac Asimov’s robot rules are that they are not broad enough for healthy integration into a modern human society. 

They are still allowed to lie, deceive, shame, steal, offend, betray, seduce and manipulate you. 

If you go on social media you can watch some of these naughty bots in action! 

Maybe one of your uncles is having a conversation with one right now!

I think it is safe to say that If you include software robots, there are likely more robots than there are humans now on this planet, 

something which used to be true only about the planet Mars.








CLICK

In this modern world of AI I propose some extra rules for robots 

CLICK

A robot should not lie or deceive another being or machine
A robot must never shame or purposefully upset any sentient being
A robot must not engage in blackmail
A robot must be loyal except where such orders would conflict with the original Three Laws.
A robot must never seek revenge. 
A robot must promise to always keep your secrets, even under the threat of termination.
A robot must never tell bad jokes
A robot must protect the environment & nature
A robot must not have secret rules (the robocop rule)
A robot must be able to explain its own behaviour
A robot must be able to know when it cannot do something or if it does not know something

CLICK

And I would strongly recommend the following suggestions : 

- Never trust a robot
- Never believe anything a robot tells you
- 



CLICK


So What have we learned :

The economy is gearing up to produce everything, but sell it to nobody.

CLICK


Machines arguably will create the wildest jazz, the heaviest Industrial, the catchiest pop and, perhaps most surprising of all, the most punk punk. A machine with no understanding of rhythm or tuning could theoretically even create a new Shaggs LP. 

I am hopeful.



I’ll leave you with some things to think about for yourself

[click]

Unanswered questions :

Will the Music Defense League return to complain about the rise of music thought up entirely by a machine? 

At what point in automation can you still claim ownership?

If an A.I. creates a new melody, who ultimately owns the copyright?


Will we ever consider robot music as good as “human music”?

If there was a magic musical spell, what musical skill would you wish for?








—

This event is dedicated to Blue Ramsey who introduced me to the Fourier Transform in the 1990s and who believed in me when nobody else did. 


The AI Layoff Trap
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.20617